# Exercise 6 - Querying Movies with JPA

In this exercise, we'll switch from writing raw SQL to using the Java Persistence API (JPA) with Spring Boot. We'll run a web application that queries the same Postgres database and displays results in a browser.

You will learn to:

- Run a Spring Boot application that connects to PostgreSQL
- Modify a JPA repository query
- Add a new field to a JPA entity

## 6.1 Running the project

> :exclamation: Make sure the Postgres Docker container from exercise 1 is still running before proceeding.

:pencil2: In a new terminal, navigate to the repository directory and run:

```shell
mvn clean spring-boot:run
```

:pencil2: Visit http://localhost:8080 in your browser. You should see a list of movies released in March 1999.

:book: This list is generated by the `MoviesController` class, which uses `MovieRepository` to query the database. After you make changes to the code, you must restart the project. If you use IntelliJ, simply rebuilding the project (Build -> Build Project) will trigger an automatic reload.

## 6.2 List all the Star Wars movies

:book: The `MovieRepository.findMovies()` method currently returns movies from March 1999. We want it to return Star Wars movies instead.

:pencil2: Change the method `MovieRepository.findMovies()` so that it returns all the Star Wars movies.

<details>
<summary>:bulb: Hint</summary>

You can use the `LIKE` keyword and the `%` wildcard to match parts of a string. Note that `LIKE` is case sensitive. There is a Postgres specific keyword called `ILIKE` which does a case-insensitive comparison. This is not part of the SQL standard, so it is not supported by all databases. The standard approach is to use `lower(m.name) LIKE '%something%'`.
</details>

## 6.3 Link to homepage

:book: In the `movies` table, you'll find a column called `homepage`, but there is no corresponding field in the `Movie` java class.

:pencil2: Add a `homepage` field to the `Movie` java class and display a link to the homepage of the movie in `movie-list.jsp`.

> :bulb: Not all movies have a homepage — make sure the link doesn't break for movies without one.

### [Go to exercise 7 :arrow_right:](../exercise-7/README.md)
